<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE chapter PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.4//EN"
    "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.4/docbookx.dtd" [
  <!ENTITY % commondata SYSTEM "common.ent" > %commondata;
]>
<chapter id="introduction">
  <title>Introduction to GNU/Linux on PowerPC</title>

  <para>
    This short chapter contains a little of background information
    regarding the PowerPC hardware on which Linux is able to run. The
    kind of PowerPC hardware that Linux supports is huge: it ranges from
    very low-powered processors up to very big and powerful
    supercomputers (with many processors, and, not uncommon,
    distributed), with all sorts of machines in the middle of this
    spectrum.
  </para>

  <para>
    Notable machines using the PowerPC architecture are the computers
    made by Apple in various of its products (the PowerBooks, the
    iBooks, some PowerMacs, some iMacs, some Mac Mini's, some of the
    Xserver's, the Cube etc.), the Apple clones, made by a good amount
    of manufacturers, the Sony PlayStation 3, and the Kuroboxes HD, HG
    and some Linkstations.
  </para>

  <para>
    It should be noted that the author is <emphasis>not</emphasis> an
    expert on PowerPC and Linux. He merely happens to have accumulated
    some knowledge by using some Linux distributions in the last decade
    and in the last half decade or so with Linux on PowerPC.
  </para>

  <para>
    There is little to no original content here and most of the concepts
    here were elaborated and compiled from many sources, distilled by
    the author's experience (sometimes, struggling to get things
    working).
  </para>

  <para>
    Please see the references for further information.
  </para>

  <section id="the-architecture">
    <title>The PowerPC Architecture</title>

    <para>
      Differently from what the reader may be familiar with (most
      probably, with the <literal>ia32</literal> or with the
      <literal>x86-64</literal> architectures), the PowerPC (which
      stands for "Power Performance Computing") architecture was
      designed for expansion.
    </para>

    <para>
      Also, differently from the <literal>ia32</literal> and
      <literal>x86-64</literal> processors, the PowerPC processors
      adopts a RISC-like Instruction Set Architecture (ISA), while the
      former adopt a CISC-like ISA. This has significant impact on the
      process of building compilers targeted at those classes of
      processors.
    </para>

    <para>
      The initial PowerPC computers had 32-bit processors (like the 601,
      the 603/603e, the 750<footnote>a.k.a. G3</footnote>, and the
      74xx<footnote>a.k.a. G4/G4+</footnote>), while some of the latest
      processors run 64-bit software and have modern technologies
      included. Most processors of the PowerPC family were developed by
      IBM and Motorola.
    </para>

    <para>
      One of the most well known sellers of systems with PowerPC
      computers was Apple, Inc., which sold its Macintosh line of
      computers with PowerPC processors (from 1994 to 2006), after
      basing their computers around Motorola's <literal>68000</literal>
      family of processors and before equipping their computers with
      Intel processors.
    </para>

    <para>
      Due to its relative low power consumption, some PowerPC processors
      are used in embedded systems<footnote>Like the Kurobox HD, a small
      embedded box, dedicated to use as a Network Attached Storage
      (NAS), which employs a Freescale MPC8241 processor.</footnote> and
      game consoles<footnote>Like Nintendo's Wii, Sony's PS3, and
      Microsoft's Xbox 360.</footnote>. Others have vectorial
      instruction units (which are, sometimes, called "multimedia units"
      and are branded under names like "Altivec" or "Velocity Engine").
    </para>

  </section>

  <section id="mac-generations">
    <title>Different Apple Macintosh Generations</title>
    
    <para>
      As older Apple's Macintoshes are the most potential platform where
      one end-user will be installing Linux, we briefly discuss the kind
      of machines that you may encounter and how their installation
      methods differ.
    </para>

    <para>
      All Apple Macs have a "BIOS" that is called Open Firmware. It is,
      basically speaking, an interface to the hardware and, with it, the
      user can store configuration options into the machine's
      Non-Volatile RAM (nvram).
    </para>

    <para>
      Among other things, the Open Firmware serves as a boot monitor
      (something like a boot manager, in a distant analogy with LILO or
      GRUB). It also keeps track of which hardware to use as input
      device (e.g., the keyboard or a serial console), which piece of
      hardware to use as an output console (e.g., the video card or,
      again, a serial console), where the boot image is etc.
      Unfortunately, Open Firmware doesn't understand<footnote>In the
      sense that it can natively read files stored in such
      filesystems.</footnote> standard Linux filesystems like
      <code>ext2</code>, <code>ext3</code>, <code>XFS</code> or others,
      being limited to only Apple's <code>HFS</code> (or, perhaps,
      HFS+). This, as we will see, has some implications on how we
      choose to boot the computers that we have at our disposal.
    </para>

    <para>
      There are two kinds of Macintosh machines: the older ones, called
      OldWorld machines, and the newer ones, called NewWorld.
    </para>

    <section id="oldworld-macs">
      <title>The OldWorld Macs</title>
    </section>

    <section id="newworld-macs">
      <title>The NewWorld Macs</title>
    </section>
  </section>

  <section>
    <title>Embedded Machines: The Kuroboxes HD/HG</title>
    <para>
      According to <ulink
      url="http://kurobox.com/revolution/what.html">http://revogear.com</ulink>,

      <blockquote>
	<para>
	  The &kuro; is a small-footprint Linux-based embedded platform
	  for a personal server.
	</para>

	<para>
	  The current incarnation of the &kuro;, the &kuro;, sports a
	  266Mhz PowerPC processor, 128MB of RAM, 2 USB 2.0 Ports, and a
	  10/100/1000Mbit network interface.
	</para>
      
	<para>
	  The &kuro; comes without a hard drive, but can hold any
	  standard IDE (parallel ATA, not SATA) 3.5" drive. The &kuro;
	  runs on a Linux kernel, and has multiple options for actual
	  distribution. Actually, any Linux distribution that supports
	  PPC will work, but so far the community has ported over
	  Gentoo, Debian, Fedora and Sylver's Distro (which is the
	  current incarnation of the Kuro's original embedded
	  distribution).
	</para>

	<para>
	  To give you a rough idea about the &kuro;/HG's power, it can
	  transcode (decode and then re-encode to another bitrate) MP3's
	  using LAME at about 25% faster than realtime. While not as
	  fast as today's modern PC's, this is coming from a box that
	  uses 17 Watts of juice. The tiny onboard fan (used to
	  dissipate the hard drive's heat) is ultra-quiet at 22dB.
	</para>

	<para>
	  The &kuro; is not for the faint of heart -- there is no
	  graphical installer, no "click here to launch your web server"
	  button. However, if you know a little about Linux, or are
	  willing to learn, the &kuro; is an excellent platform for a
	  small space server.
	</para>
      </blockquote>
    </para>
  </section>

  <section id="foo-bar">
    <title>Foo bar</title>
    <para>
      <literal>aeiou <replaceable>foo</replaceable></literal>
    </para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  First item.
	</para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
	<para>
	  Another item. An e-mail made with an entity:
	  &email-debian-devel-changes;.
	</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <para>
      An external url link: <ulink
      url="http://rb.doesntexist.org/">Rogério Brito's homepage</ulink>.
      An internal link: <xref linkend="oldworld-macs"/>
    </para>
  </section>

</chapter>
